3.2. T OP-L EVEL A IRCRAFT R EQUIREMENTS

17

ers.

3.2. T OP-L EVEL A IRCRAFT R EQUIREMENTS

FT

One of the most important goals when communicating with the stakeholders is to deduce a good set of top-level aircraft requirements (TLARs). These requirements unambiguously state what conditions the airplane design needs to fulfill at the end of its design
cycle.
The first and foremost requirement is the payload requirement. In other words: what
is it that the airplane needs to transport? And, secondly, how much of that payload needs
to be transported in terms of the number of items, payload mass, and payload volume?
These requirements are often driving the size of the fuselage, where the payload is typically stored. Furthermore, the mass of the payload is an important driver for the mass
of the airplane and, therefore, an important requirement to start the design process. For
military airplanes, the payload can consist of armament (bombs, missiles, or guns). Reconnaissance drones typically carry a payload system, for example, a photo camera. Regardless of the type of airplane you are designing, the payload requirement is an important first step.
Example 3.2

D

RA

For a commercial transport airplane, the payload requirement typically comprises passengers and cargo. Based on the interaction with potential customers, there might be a
list of payload requirements. This is an example of such a list:
1. The airplane shall be able to transport 300 passengers and their luggage in a highdensity cabin configuration with a 31” seat pitch and 16.5” seat width.
2. The airplane shall be able to transport 250 passengers and their luggage in a typical
two-class configuration with 15% business class (55” seat pitch, 20” seat width)
and 85% in economy class with a 32” seat pitch and 16.5” seat width.
3. The airplane shall be able to store 20 m3 of cargo (excluding volume for luggage).
4. The airplane shall have a maximum structural payload of 35 tonnes.
The previous example shows that there are different payload requirements that do
not necessarily act at the same time. Often a so-called design payload is specified. The
design payload is the payload that you decide to be the most flown. In the example
above, the design payload would be the second item: 250 passengers plus their luggage.
The design payload can be the same as the maximum structural payload, but could also
be lower, as is the case in the previous example. In specifying the range requirements of
the aircraft, the design payload is coupled to the so-called design range, which we discuss
below.
You might have noticed from the previous example that the payload requirement
list is quite specific. The dimensions of the seat width and seat pitch are important to
determine the required volume for the passengers in the fuselage. Also, the required
volume for cargo is specified. Many transport airplanes carry cargo and luggage together
in the same cargo holds. If that is indeed the case, you have to compute how much
volume is required in the cargo hold to store the luggage and the cargo together. Note,
F OR R EVIEW O NLY. D O N OT D ISTRIBUTE

18

3. R EQUIREMENTS AND O BJECTIVES

that for large transport airplanes, the carry-on luggage is stored in the main passenger
cabin. In other words, you need to investigate how much volume is required for luggage
in the cabin and how much volume is required for luggage in the cargo hold.
The average mass of a passenger at European airports in 2022 was 76 kg, and their average carry-on luggage weighed 8 kg. The mass of checked luggage is typically bounded
by a maximum set by the airline (i.e. 23 kg for long-haul flights). However, the average
checked luggage mass in 2022 at European airports was 16 kg. A single average passenger
at a European airport therefore has a payload mass of 100 kg. To enable the estimation of
the required volumes for storing luggage and cargo, you may assume an average density
of luggage of ρ luggage = 170 kg/m3 and an average density of cargo of ρ cargo = 160 kg/m3 .
A SSIGNMENT 3.1

FT

Define the payload-related requirements by answering the following questions:
a. Answer the following questions relating to the maximum-capacity condition of the airplane:

RA

i. How many passengers are required to be transported?
ii. What is the mass of the passengers plus their luggage?
iii. How are the passengers divided among different classes?
iv. What seat width and seat pitch do you require?
v. How many cubic meters of luggage do you need?
vi. How much volume is required in the cabin for carry-on luggage?
vii. How much volume is needed in a cargo hold for luggage?
viii. What is the cargo mass?
ix. How much cargo volume is required?
x. What is the maximum structural payload mass?
b. Answer the following questions relating to the design condition of the airplane: a

D

i. How many passengers are required to be transported?
ii. What is the mass of the passengers plus their luggage?
iii. How are the passengers divided among different classes?
iv. What seat width and seat pitch do you require?
v. How many cubic meters of luggage do you need to transport?
vi. How much volume is required in the cabin for carry-on luggage?
vii. How much volume is needed in a cargo hold for luggage?
viii. How much cargo volume is required?
ix. What is the cargo mass?
x. What is the design payload mass?

a If the maximum-capacity condition and the design condition are the same, you can skip this step.

To derive part of the flight performance requirements, you should define a mission
profile for the envisioned design. This can graphically show what it is that the airplane
needs to do. The mission profile can be a starting point for deriving the top-level aircraft
requirements. The following examples illustrate how one sketches a mission profile and
F OR R EVIEW O NLY. D O N OT D ISTRIBUTE

3.2. T OP-L EVEL A IRCRAFT R EQUIREMENTS

19

derives the flight performance requirements.
Example 3.3
The mission profile for a transport airplane is shown in Figure 3.1. It shows the twodimensional profile of the mission, with the horizontal axis representing the distance
traveled and the vertical axis representing the altitude of the airplane. As can seen, each
phase of the flight is annotated to stipulate what is happening during that phase.
origin

destination
nominal range

alternate
diversion range

cruise to destination

diversion cruise

descent

loiter

FT

accelerate and climb to
cruise altitude and speed

climb

taxi

attempt to land

take-off

descent

land + taxi

Figure 3.1: Typical mission profile for a transport airplane.

RA

Based on this mission profile, we deduce the following top-level aircraft requirements:
• Taxi: the airplane needs to be able to taxi on a paved taxiway
• Take-off: the airplane needs to be able to take off from a 2.5-km paved runway at
sea-level conditions
• Climb: the airplane needs to have a climb rate of 1 m/s at top-of-climb at cruise
speed and cruise altitude at 98% of its maximum take-off mass.
• The airplane shall cruise at a Mach number of M = 0.8

D

• The nominal range of the airplane with all passengers on board in a typical seating
configuration and without additional cargo is 3,000 km.
• Landing: the airplane shall be able to land on a 2.9-km paved runway in all weather
conditions at sea level.
• Diversion: the airplane shall carry sufficient fuel to divert to an alternate airport
that is 400 km away, hold (loiter) for 30 minutes, and then perform a landing.

The mission profile of Figure 3.1 shows two distinct ‘hops’. The first hop is the nominal mission; i.e. the mission that is flown from origin to destination. The distance between these two points is referred to as the nominal range. The second hop is the diversion part of the mission, which is only used when the airplane is unable to land at the
end of its nominal mission. It then needs to fly to an alternate airport, hold (i.e. loiter),
and land. To be able to fly to an alternate airport is often required by airworthiness regulations. However, the top-level aircraft requirements typically only specify the nominal
F OR R EVIEW O NLY. D O N OT D ISTRIBUTE

20

3. R EQUIREMENTS AND O BJECTIVES

RA

FT

range. When designing the airplane, sufficient fuel needs to be taken on board to fly the
complete mission profile, including the diversion leg. Specifying the diversion range is
therefore required.
If we examine the requirements that we have derived based on the mission profile,
you can see that they are specific and measurable. Of course, these requirements are just
an example, but you can see how we use the mission profile to start deriving the mission requirements. It shows that from each phase of the mission, different requirements
might result. You need to gather all these requirements to the best of your ability prior
to starting the design process. Quantification of the requirements is important such that
you can verify compliance with the requirement at the end of the design process. Therefore, you also need to select analysis methods that can quantify the performance aspects
that are listed in the requirements. That would allow you to determine whether your
design meets all the requirements.
Some of the requirements might seem somewhat ambiguous at first sight and we
need to make them more specific in order to be able to check whether they have been
met. For example, a ‘typical seating configuration’ is not specific. Therefore, we need to
turn to the payload requirement to understand what is implied by this statement. The
other example of a seemingly ambiguous requirement is the statement to be able to land
in ‘all-weather conditions.’ However, this typically implies that you need to consider the
worst-case weather scenario and still make sure you comply with this requirement. It is
evident that on a dry runway, you can break much harder without slipping than on an
icy runway. Therefore, this requirement implies that you should be able to land within
the specified distance on a dry, wet, and icy runway.
Example 3.4

Figure 3.2 shows the mission profile for a high-altitude reconnaissance airplane. Such
an airplane is typically used by the military to gather information. The airplane flies
for a long period of time over the same area and relays photographs through a satellite
connection to the ground station.
destination

D

origin

origin

mission radius

climb to observation altitude

mission radius

loiter

descent

cruise to destination

cruise back to home

accelerate and climb to
cruise altitude and speed

taxi

descent

land + taxi

Figure 3.2: Typical mission profile for a reconnaissance airplane.

From this mission profile, we can deduce the following requirements:
F OR R EVIEW O NLY. D O N OT D ISTRIBUTE


